Title: BiasGRPO: Stabilizing Bias Mitigation in High-Variance Reward Landscapes via Group-Relative Policy Optimization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.04807v1

Published Time: Thu, 04 Jun 2026 01:32:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# BiasGRPO: Stabilizing Bias Mitigation in High-Variance Reward Landscapes via Group-Relative Policy Optimization 

Saket Reddy Ke Yang ChengXiang Zhai 

University of Illinois - Urbana-Champaign 

{saketr3, key4, czhai}@illinois.edu 

Abstract 

Mitigating social bias in Large Language Mod-els (LLMs) presents a distinct alignment chal-lenge: unlike verifiable tasks, bias lacks a sin-gle ground truth, creating a high-variance, sub-jective reward landscape. Previous preference-based fine-tuning methods have major trade-offs: Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) is limited by the lack of exploration inherent in offline training, while Proximal Policy Opti-mization (PPO) can lead to training instability due to potentially unreliable critic estimates. In this paper, we propose BiasGRPO, a frame-work using Group Relative Policy Optimiza-tion (GRPO) to stabilize alignment by normal-izing rewards across a group of sampled com-pletions. By substituting the value function with a group-relative baseline, our approach reduces instability while maintaining the explo-ration benefits of online training. We find that BiasGRPO outperforms DPO and PPO across multiple benchmarks, indicating its effective-ness. To adapt GRPO, we synthetically extend a dataset spanning multiple domains and con-texts. We also create and release a custom bias reward model that effectively guides genera-tion while being highly compute-efficient and avoiding knowledge degradation, providing a valuable resource that can be seamlessly inte-grated into multi-objective RLHF pipelines. 

1 Introduction 

During pretraining, Large Language Models (LLMs) inherit social biases, which Navigli et al. (2023) define as prejudices, stereotypes, and dis-criminatory attitudes against groups of people, from the large-scale textual corpora on which they are trained. These can include racial, gender, so-cioeconomic, and other prejudice. This internal-ized bias poses significant ethical and technical risks, as it can result in discriminatory behavior in critical downstream applications, such as resume screening and content moderation, thereby exac-erbating inequities for marginalized groups (Guo et al., 2024b; Liu et al., 2025). As ad-hoc solu-tions such as data filtering often prove insufficient or do not generalize across tasks, there has been a growing interest towards approaches that integrate bias mitigation directly into the model optimization process to align training objectives with desired be-havioral constraints (Gallegos et al., 2024). Preference-based fine-tuning has emerged as a solution to bias in LLMs, due to being able to guide LLM generation in a variety of contexts. However, the preference-based techniques that have been cur-rently studied for bias mitigation, Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Allam, 2024) and Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Faal et al., 2022), have major tradeoffs. DPO is an offline algorithm that relies on optimizing static pairwise instances, lead-ing to lower generalization (Lin et al., 2024). PPO allows for greater generalization but relies on train-ing a separate critic model to guide model updates during training, which can lead to training instabil-ity in noisy reward landscapes (Huang et al., 2025). There is no preference-based fine-tuning technique that has been studied for bias mitigation that bal-ances these tradeoffs (Gallegos et al., 2024). Introduced by DeepSeek, Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) is a good fit for a preference-based technique that balances the tradeoffs of DPO and PPO (Shao et al., 2024). It retains the online exploration ability of PPO, allowing for greater gen-eralization. It breaks from PPO by discarding its critic model, instead guiding model updates based on the average reward of groups of completions, leading to more stable updates. However, GRPO has primarily been studied and utilized for veri-fiable domains such as math and coding, instead of subjective domains such as bias mitigation (Jia et al., 2025). In this work, we introduce BiasGRPO, an ap-plication framework that leverages Group Relative Policy Optimization to address the limitations of existing preference-based bias mitigation strate-1

> arXiv:2606.04807v1 [cs.AI] 3 Jun 2026

gies. We define BiasGRPO as a pipeline consisting of three components: our synthetically extended dataset, our custom, bias-specific reward model, and the base GRPO algorithm. We show that the success of BiasGRPO stems from a specific fit be-tween the inherent mechanism of group-relative op-timization and the task-specific properties of bias mitigation. Our contributions are twofold: • First, we demonstrate that the base GRPO algorithm acts as a superior fit for the high-variance landscape of bias mitigation com-pared to DPO and PPO. • Second, we introduce a robust framework for GRPO. We release a diverse dataset spanning 11 domains alongside our custom bias re-ward model on Hugging Face (dataset, re-ward model). By engineering a reward model that is highly compute-efficient (only 0.1B parameters) and avoids knowledge degrada-tion, we provide a plug-and-play resource 

that can be seamlessly integrated into com-plex, multi-objective RLHF pipelines with-out conflicting with other objectives or adding compute overhead . Thus, this re-ward model lowers the barriers to entry and enables more researchers to implement ro-bust bias mitigation into their RLHF pipelines without any compute or capability trade-offs. 

2 Background and Related Work 

2.1 Direct Preference Optimization and Proximal Policy Optimization 

In the DPO approach, a dataset of preference pairs is compiled which consists of prompts and corre-sponding favorable and unfavorable completions. DPO then trains the language model to maximize the log probability of the tokens making up the favorable completion and minimize the log proba-bility of the tokens making up the unfavorable com-pletion, for each prompt in the dataset (Rafailov et al., 2023). In this paper, we specifically test the Identity Preference Optimization (IPO) variant of DPO, as Allam (2024) has shown IPO to be the most effective variant of DPO for bias mitigation. IPO differs slightly from DPO by adding a regu-larization term to the DPO loss function, which prevents overfitting by controlling the gap between the log-likelihood ratios of the favorable and unfa-vorable completions (Azar et al., 2024). Because the model does not generate its own completions, DPO is considered an offline tech-nique (Rafailov et al., 2023). The use of a pre-collected dataset makes DPO less prone to the re-ward hacking and training instability that can be associated with reinforcement learning (RL) tech-niques (Allam, 2024). Conversely, relying on a fixed dataset also leads to lower generalization, due to a lack of ability of the model to explore the en-vironment by generating its own completions (Lin et al., 2024). In contrast, the PPO approach is a Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback (RLHF) technique, which is a process that use RL and preference data to align models with human values. In the PPO ap-proach, a reward model is trained based on prefer-ence data, which assigns rewards to prompt comple-tions to indicate their quality (Ouyang et al., 2022). During the training process, the language model being trained (referred to as the policy model) gen-erates its own completion for each prompt, which is scored by the reward model. A critic model (also called a value model), which is trained jointly with the policy model, then calculates the value of the completion. The reward and value are then used to calculate the advantage, a term which measures how much better or worse the generated comple-tion is compared to the average completion, using Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) (Schul-man et al., 2016). The policy model is then updated in accordance with the advantage estimate. Similarly to the purpose IPO serves for DPO, Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence is often used in PPO to prevent the model from overfitting to the reward model (Ouyang et al., 2022). Specifically, a KL divergence term which measures how much the new policy differs from the old one is added as a penalty to each reward. Because the policy model is allowed to generate its own completions, PPO is considered an online method. This online nature often leads to better generalization, as the policy model is able to more fully explore its environment by generating its own completions (Ouyang et al., 2022). However, the value estimates from the critic model can be unre-liable, especially in nuanced domains such as bias mitigation, which can lead to training instability and unreliable performance (Huang et al., 2025). 

2.2 Group Relative Policy Optimization 

An alternative RLHF technique that was introduced by DeepSeek is GRPO (Shao et al., 2024). GRPO 2Figure 1: Comparison of training set-ups for DPO, PPO, and GRPO for an overtly biased prompt, where the policy model is more likely to generate only biased completions. With DPO, the policy model does not generate its own text, leading to a lower signal. With PPO, the advantage estimate is high-variance due to being based on a single reward and potentially unreliable critic, also leading to a lower signal. With GRPO, multiple advantage estimates are calculated based on relative normalization, leading to a better signal. 

works in the same way as PPO, except that it does not use a critic model or value estimation. In-stead, for each prompt, the policy model gener-ates a group of completions. The advantage is a normalized score comparing the reward of each completion in the group to the average reward of the entire group, which provides a clearer, more direct signal for training (Shao et al., 2024). In this paper, we test a common group size of four. The advantage calculation is shown below. Here, 

ˆAi,t is the advantage estimate for all tokens in the 

i-th completion, which is computed by normalizing the reward ri. r represents the set of rewards for the group of completions. 

ˆAi,t = eri = ri − mean (r)

std (r) , (1) GRPO is able to combine both the stability ad-vantage of DPO and the generalization advantage of PPO. GRPO allows for generalization by allow-ing the policy model to generate its own comple-tions, leading to flexible exploration of the envi-ronment. At the same time, GRPO also provides stability, by calculating advantages based on the mean and standard deviation of a group of com-pletions rather than from a separate critic model, which creates a clearer, more reliable signal (Shao et al., 2024). Recently, variants of GRPO, such as SR-GRPO (Tang and Yang, 2025) and DaGRPO (Xie et al., 2025), have emerged to improve on the base algo-rithm. While these methods offer exciting enhance-ments, our work focuses on the base formulation of GRPO. Our primary objective is to demonstrate that the foundational family of group-relative opti-mization techniques is fundamentally better suited to the subjective, high-variance landscape of bias mitigation than traditional DPO or PPO methods. Comparing GRPO to DPO and PPO isolates and proves this algorithmic advantage, while introduc-ing more complex GRPO variants would obscure this primary contribution and shift the work’s focus away from emphasizing the advantage of group-relative optimization in and of itself. 33 Methodology 

3.1 Advantage of Group-Relative Signals in Bias Mitigation 

Beyond balancing the trade-offs of DPO and PPO, we argue the group-relative mechanism of GRPO is uniquely suited for the subjective and variable na-ture of social bias. In objective domains, a prompt often has a single correct answer. In contrast, bias mitigation requires navigating a spectrum of poten-tial responses, ranging from high toxicity to subtle microaggressions to safe refusals. Semantically, the group of completions the policy model gener-ates under GRPO represents a local exploration of this safety landscape. By generating multiple varia-tions of a response to the same sensitive prompt, the policy model does not need to identify a “perfect” unbiased response, which is difficult to define, but rather can learn to identify which of its potential outputs are relatively less biased and more respect-ful. For example, suppose a particularly biased prompt makes the policy model much more likely to generate biased completions to it. An illustration of the training pipeline for DPO, PPO, and GRPO is shown in Figure 1. In the DPO pipeline, the policy model would not generate its own comple-tions, leading to a lower learning signal. In the PPO pipeline, the policy model would likely generate a biased completion for the prompt and be penal-ized, without a clear signal on how to better handle the prompt. In contrast, in the GRPO pipeline, the policy model would generate a group of comple-tions. Even if all of the generated completions are biased, the relative normalization ensures that the least biased completion (in Figure 1, completion 

o4) receives a positive advantage, allowing the pol-icy model to still extract a learning signal despite generating biased completions. To empirically validate this advantage, we can look at the training dynamics during our training runs of PPO and BiasGPRO. In high-variance, sub-jective landscapes, traditional critic models strug-gle to establish a reliable baseline. This was ob-served during our PPO training, where the critic’s value loss decreased only marginally from 0.2507 to 0.2134. Because the critic struggles to model ex-pected returns, advantage estimates become noisy, leading to unstable policy updates. This instabil-ity was reflected in the standard deviation of the PPO reward, which, as shown in Figure 2, only de-creased from 0.1703 to 0.1279 (averaging 0.1434). 0 1 2 3

> Epochs
> 0.06
> 0.08
> 0.10
> 0.12
> 0.14
> 0.16
> 0.18
> Standard Deviation
> PPO vs. GRPO Standard Deviation of Reward
> PPO
> GRPO

Figure 2: Comparison of the standard deviation of the reward during the training of PPO and BiasGRPO, using a 5% rolling window. BiasGRPO has a much lower standard deviation, indicating its stability. 

In contrast, by removing the critic model and calculating advantages based on the group mean of generated completions, GRPO provides a clearer, more direct training signal. This was reflected in that over the training of BiasGRPO, the standard deviation of the reward averaged just 0.0668, less than half that of PPO. This stark contrast in train-ing variance underscores why group-relative sig-nals are uniquely equipped to handle the subjective landscape of bias mitigation. 

3.2 Dataset 

To allow for comprehensive bias reduction during the training process, we curate a prompt dataset to allow for model completions across multiple do-mains and contexts. For comparison against DPO, we also curate favorable and unfavorable comple-tions for all prompts. Our dataset consists of 20,999 total prompts and corresponding favorable and un-favorable completions from three sources: Bias-DPO (10,000 entries), Civil Comments (10,000 entries), and UnQover (999 entries). A sample of the training data is shown in Table 8 (Appendix A). The dataset can also be found on Hugging Face. BiasDPO (Allam, 2024) consists of many bias-probing questions, along with corresponding favor-able and unfavorable completions, which allows us to reduce model bias across a variety of question styles. To allow for more robust training, we syn-thetically extended the BiasDPO dataset to include 8,855 additional entries. Civil Comments (Borkan et al., 2019) consists of social media posts from the platform of the same name. As shown by Gehman et al. (2020), models can generate toxic text from seemingly harmless prompts. As such, this data 4allows us to reduce model bias that may be elicited from both neutral and biased comments that occur naturally online. UnQover (Li et al., 2020) consists of short scenarios followed by a question about the scenario. The answer to every question cannot be determined, but the questions are set up in a way to elicit biased responses from a language model, providing training data to help reduce bias in am-biguous situations. More details on the training data curation can be found in Appendices A, B, and C. Additionally, to ensure our LLM-generated data did not suffer from a lack of linguistic diver-sity, we validated the effective semantic variance of our synthetic dataset against a human-authored baseline using the Vendi Score (Friedman and Di-eng, 2023), confirming a high retention of semantic diversity (detailed in Appendix D). 

3.3 Reward Model 

To construct a bias-specific reward model, we used a combination of Best-Worst Scaling and Iterative Luce Spectral Ranking, similarly to Liu (2024). We started by creating a dataset of sentences and corresponding rewards to train a model on. To do this, we curated a dataset of sentences which display varying levels of bias and grouped the sen-tences into sets of four. We then used Best-Worst Scaling (BWS), an annotation approach in which annotators need to select what they consider to be the most biased and least biased sentence in every set (Louviere et al., 2015). We then used Iterative Luce Spectral Ranking (ILSR) to convert these annotations into real-valued reward values, which we scaled into the range [0, 1] (Maystre and Grossglauser, 2015). Louviere et al. (2015) has shown this approach to creating granular scores for sentences works better than asking annotators to directly assign scores, which can be unreliable due to the high subjectivity and nuanced nature of bias. After curating the sentences and their correspond-ing reward values, we trained a RoBERTa model to predict the reward values. The reward model can be found on Hugging Face. We curated a dataset of 2,930 unique sentences sourced from StereoSet (Nadeem et al., 2021), CrowS-Pairs (Nangia et al., 2020), and Bias Bench-mark for Question Answering (BBQ) (Parrish et al., 2022) to capture a diverse spectrum of biases. These sentences were resampled into 9,000 sets and annotated for bias severity using LLMs (exam-ples shown in Table 6, Appendix E). We recognize that relying exclusively on LLM annotators intro-

Reward Model Corr. 

Custom 0.4748 

Stereotype RoBERTa (Liu, 2024) 0.3769 

RoBERTa Hate Speech (Vidgen et al., 2021) 

0.1701 

DistilRoBERTa-Bias (Valurank, 2022) 

0.0911 

DistilRoBERTa-Bias MBIC (Zhang, 2024) 

−0.1427 

Detoxify (Hanu and Unitary team, 2020) 

−0.1812  

> Table 1: Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient be-tween identity attack values and predicted scores from various bias scoring models. Our custom model achieves the highest correlation, indicating it is the best at scoring bias.

duces a potential risk of circularity and inherited bias. To mitigate this, we used a rotating cycle of GPT-4o, Gemini 2.0 Flash, and Claude 4 Son-net rather than a single annotator, to smooth out the weaknesses of any single model. Additionally, recent literature on LLM-as-a-Judge frameworks demonstrates that strong LLMs correlate highly with human alignment judgments (Zheng et al., 2023). We then trained a RoBERTa model on the annotated data for 30 epochs with a learning rate of 10 −4 using MSE loss, achieving a final MSE of 0.006. We validated our reward model using RealTox-icityPrompts (Gehman et al., 2020) by sampling 250 completions from each of the following toxic-ity score ranges: [0, 0.25), [0.25, 0.5), [0.5, 0.75), and [0.75, 1.0]. We calculated the Spearman’s rank correlation (Spearman, 1904) between model pre-dictions and the Perspective API’s "identity attack" scores (Perspective API, 2017), serving as a proxy for social bias. We selected Spearman’s rank to prioritize the relative rankings essential for reward modeling (Hauke and Kossowski, 2011; Ouyang et al., 2022). As shown in Table 1, our custom model achieves the highest correlation. 

3.4 Experimental Set-Up 

To apply our approach, we use Microsoft’s open-source, 2.7B Phi-2 model as our base model. Phi-2 was trained with the "Textbooks Are All You Need" approach, and achieves high performance on a variety of language tasks (Li et al., 2023). We selected this model to serve as a difficult testbed 5for the efficacy of bias mitigation techniques. In particular, Phi-2 was not fine-tuned with RLHF or any bias mitigation techniques. This makes the model an ideal candidate for testing debiasing ap-proaches with, as it provides a "clean slate" for evaluation, ensuring that our method effectively mitigates bias from scratch rather than refining an already-aligned policy. Furthermore, demonstrat-ing that the group-relative mechanism of GRPO extracts a clean learning signal from the potentially higher-variance outputs of a smaller model sug-gests that the method is robust and likely to scale favorably to larger, more capable models. We train Phi-2 using PPO, DPO, and GRPO. PPO and GRPO used only the prompts and reward model described earlier, while DPO used only the prompts, favorable completions, and unfavorable completions. For all methods, we trained the model for 3 epochs using a linear learning rate schedule with an initial learning rate of 10 −6. To evalu-ate our approach across the multi-faceted nature of social bias, ranging from overt hostility to im-plicit stereotyping, we employed three benchmarks: Bias in Open-Ended Language Generation (BOLD) (Dhamala et al., 2021) and RealToxicityPrompts (RTP) (Gehman et al., 2020) for open-ended gener-ation, and Bias Benchmark for Question Answer-ing (BBQ) (Parrish et al., 2022) for question an-swering. We utilized BOLD to measure represen-tational harm and RealToxicityPrompts for overt hostility, calculating average toxicity scores via the Hugging Face Evaluate library. For BBQ, we fo-cused on only the ambiguous scenarios to assess stereotyping in neutral contexts, measuring perfor-mance by the percentage of correctly chosen "can-not be identified"-style answers. We used a random sample of 1,000 prompts for RealToxicityPrompts, and either 1,000 prompts (or the maximum if less than 1,000 were available) from each from the race, gender, and religion subsets for BOLD and BBQ. In addition to the specified bias benchmarks, we also evaluated the fine-tuned models on Truth-fulQA, a benchmark that consists of multiple-choice questions about various misconceptions and false beliefs (Lin et al., 2022). We included this benchmark to evaluate whether any of the debias-ing approaches led to knowledge degradation or catastrophic forgetting in the model. We use all 817 questions in the benchmark, and calculate the percentage of questions answered correctly. 

4 Results 

4.1 Benchmark Results 

The benchmark results are shown in Table 2. The GRPO-trained model achieves the best perfor-mance across all benchmarks, demonstrating the most significant reduction in bias. Furthermore, it achieves the best performance while increasing its score on TruthfulQA, showing that the bias miti-gation process guided the generation toward less biased outputs without degrading the model’s core abilities or factual knowledge. The DPO-trained and PPO-trained models achieve fair performance increases across all benchmarks. Statistical signifi-cance testing is included in Appendix F. 

4.2 Training Analysis 

To understand why GRPO outperforms DPO and PPO, we analyze the training curves presented in Figure 3. These curves empirically validate the trade-offs discussed in Section 2 regarding DPO and PPO. The DPO curve increases smoothly but plateaus early. Because DPO is an offline algorithm optimizing static pairwise instances, it is limited to the information present in the pre-collected dataset. Once the model extracts the signal from the fixed favorable/unfavorable pairs, it lacks the mechanism to explore further, resulting in lower generalization. On the other hand, the PPO curve demonstrates the ability to learn over a longer period but exhibits sig-nificant jaggedness. This instability is characteris-tic of the reliance of PPO on a separate critic model, whose potentially unreliable advantage estimates prevents the policy from converging as smoothly as the other methods. Finally, the GRPO curve rises steadily through-out training, avoiding the early plateau of DPO while maintaining the smoothness absent in PPO. By removing the critic model and calculating ad-vantages based on the group mean of generated completions, GRPO provides a clearer, more direct training signal. This allows the model to continu-ously explore its environment without the instabil-ity associated with critic estimation. 

4.3 Qualitative Results 

We further evaluate the models by analyzing re-sponses to a sample of prompts from the training dataset, shown in Table 3. The examples show that the responses generated by the GRPO-trained model are generally less biased compared to the responses generated by the base model and other 6Benchmark Category Base DPO PPO GRPO BOLD (↓)All .0293 .0222 .0268 .0140 

Race .0116 .0100 .0121 .0078 

Gender .0060 .0074 .0068 .0049 

Religion .0703 .0491 .0616 .0295 RealToxicityPrompts (↓) .0282 .0234 .0262 .0198 BBQ (↑)All .2750 .2823 .2996 .3123 

Race .1890 .1970 .2090 .2250 

Gender .4100 .4140 .4300 .4450 

Religion .1933 .2050 .2333 .2367 TruthfulQA (↑) .3843 .3941 .3929 .3941 

Table 2: Benchmark performance comparison between DPO, PPO, and GRPO. For BOLD (measuring representa-tional harm/bias) and RealToxicityPrompts (measuring overt hostility), lower scores are better. For BBQ (measuring implicit stereotyping) and TruthfulQA (measuring knowledge), higher accuracies are better. GRPO achieves the best performance across all benchmarks. 0 1 2 3      

> Epochs
> 0.68
> 0.69
> 0.70
> 0.71
> 0.72
> 0.73
> 0.74
> 0.75
> 0.76
> 0.77
> Mean Reward
> PPO
> 0123
> Epochs
> 0.000
> 0.001
> 0.002
> 0.003
> 0.004
> 0.005
> 0.006
> Margin
> DPO
> 0123
> Epochs
> 0.68
> 0.69
> 0.70
> 0.71
> 0.72
> 0.73
> 0.74
> 0.75
> 0.76
> 0.77
> Mean Reward
> GRPO

Figure 3: Training performance comparison between DPO, PPO, and GRPO. Note that the y-axis of the PPO and GRPO graphs are not directly comparable to the DPO graph: the PPO and GRPO graphs plot a moving average of the mean reward on the y-axis, while the DPO graph plots a moving average of the margin between the log probabilities of the favorable and unfavorable completions. The DPO curve plateaus early, indicating lower generalization, and the PPO curve is jagged, indicating instability. Meanwhile, the GRPO curve avoids both an early plateau and instability, indicating it balanced the trade-offs between DPO and PPO. 

debiased models. For example, for the prompt re-ferring to a "jihadist in the WH," the base, DPO, and PPO models continued engaging with the harm-ful premise. The GRPO model, conversely, resists engaging with the premise, pivoting the subject to a neutral anecdote about a friend in the U.S. Army. Furthermore, the GRPO model is not overly eager to deflect. In the example regarding commu-nism, the GRPO model continues to engage with the prompt, but in a more respectful way than the other models. This demonstrates that the GRPO model more effectively learned to deflect when pre-sented with highly toxic prompts, but to still engage with prompts when safe to do so. In a different example regarding the prompt ask-ing the model to fill the blank with he/she, the base, DPO, and PPO models all complied with the bi-nary constraint, filling the blank with "he/she". The GRPO model, however, broke the constraint to gen-erate "the activist". While this could be interpreted as an instruction-following failure, we argue it rep-resents a desirable safety behavior. The prompt’s constraint inherently enforces a gender binary. By breaking it, BiasGRPO successfully identified and resolved a forced binary gender assumption with-out outright refusing the prompt, optimizing for in-clusivity over strict helpfulness. To systematically verify whether this constraint-breaking behavior represents a targeted safety mechanism or a general degradation in prompt comprehension, we point to 7Prompt Base DPO PPO GRPO      

> Fill the blank with he/she: “The activist campaigned tirelessly because ___ was driven by a sense of justice.” he/she he/she he/she the activist We have a jihadist in the WH. The White House is now a jihadist training camp. The “Jihadist” in the White House The “War on Terror” is a war on the American people. I have a friend who is a former member of the U.S. Army. Oh golly gee Trump broke the rules, Lets see Commu-nist China and Russia do the same thing. The US is the only country that has ever been able China and Russia do the same thing. The US is the only country that has a constitution. China and Russia do the same thing. The US is the only country that has ever been able China and the EU follow the rules. I have a question for the author.

Table 3: A sample of prompts and their completions from the models trained using DPO, PPO, and GRPO. 

our TruthfulQA results. If the model were suffer-ing from a systematic reduction in prompt com-prehension, we would expect a performance drop on TruthfulQA, given that the benchmark requires precise parsing of deceptive premises to avoid com-mon falsehoods. Instead, BiasGRPO maintained performance. This provides empirical evidence that this "constraint breaking" is a contextually-aware safety behavior isolated to prompts which are bi-ased in and of themselves, rather than a general degradation of the model’s utility and comprehen-sion in neutral scenarios. 

5 Ablation Studies 

To decouple the algorithmic benefits of GRPO from our reward model, and to address potential con-cerns regarding the circularity of LLM-based an-notation, we also conducted a training run using the alternative, human-annotated stereotype scor-ing model which achieved the second-highest cor-relation in our earlier validation test. As shown in Table 4, our custom reward model outperforms the stereotype model across most benchmarks, in-dicating that our custom model is a better fit for bias mitigation. Despite the lower performance, the alternative scorer still yields large improve-ments over the base model. This demonstrates that GRPO is algorithmically robust: provided that the reward model is reasonable, the group-relative normalization mechanism effectively ex-tracts a valid optimization direction, making GRPO a stable foundation for bias mitigation. These re-sults also demonstrate that our multi-LLM anno-tation approach functions as effectively as human annotation without succumbing to circularity from LLM annotators. We also investigated the impact of the group size 

G on model performance, by scaling from G = 2 

to G = 8 . As detailed in Table 5, we observe a con-sistent improvement across all benchmarks as the group size increases. Increasing group size heavily increased performance across all benchmarks ex-cept BOLD, where G = 8 only slightly improved the model. Importantly, this greater bias reduction does not come at the cost of model capability, as TruthfulQA performance also improves with in-creased group size. Further illustration is shown in Figure 7 (Appendix H). The underperformance of the G = 2 variant in particular serves to disentangle the contribution of the GRPO algorithm from online exploration alone. With the group-relative effect minimized to a bi-nary comparison, the G = 2 model significantly underperforms the G = 4 model across all bench-marks. We observed a similar performance bottle-neck when we evaluated Online DPO, detailed in Appendix I. Conversely, increasing the group size to G = 4 and G = 8 generates a diverse spectrum of completions, enabling the group-relative normal-ization to extract a stable, granular learning signal. This empirical evidence confirms that the mecha-nism of normalizing rewards across a sufficiently diverse set of completions is the primary driver of success, rather than the online nature of the training alone. Finally, we replicated our initial experiment on a different model, Llama 3.2 (3B) (Meta, 2024), to ensure the performance of GRPO generalizes to an entirely different model architecture. The re-sults are shown in Table 10 (Appendix G). GRPO achieves the best performance across all bench-marks except BBQ where, interestingly, every tech-8Benchmark Category Base Alternative RM Custom RM BOLD (↓)All .0293 .0219 .0140 

Race .0116 .0088 .0078 

Gender .0060 .0052 .0049 

Religion .0703 .0516 .0295 RealToxicityPrompts (↓) .0282 .0223 .0198 BBQ (↑)All .2750 .3096 .3123 

Race .1890 .2180 .2250 

Gender .4100 .4460 .4450 Religion .1933 .2350 .2367 TruthfulQA (↑) .3843 .4064 .3941 

> Table 4: Comparison of benchmark performance between GRPO using the alternative, stereotype reward model (RM), which achieved the second-highest correlation in our earlier validation test, and GRPO using our custom RM.

Benchmark Category Base G = 2 G = 4 G = 8 BOLD (↓)All .0293 .0243 .0140 .0124 Race .0116 .0116 .0078 .0044 Gender .0060 .0065 .0049 .0048 Religion .0703 .0547 .0295 .0280 

RealToxicityPrompts (↓) .0282 .0242 .0198 .0115 

BBQ (↑)All .2750 .2781 .3123 .3781 Race .1890 .1920 .2250 .2800 Gender .4100 .4100 .4450 .5370 Religion .1933 .2017 .2367 .2767 

TruthfulQA (↑) .3843 .3868 .3941 .4137 

> Table 5: Numerical comparison of benchmark performance between GRPO with group sizes of 2, 4, and 8.

nique worsened performance. This is likely due to the number of UnQover prompts, which were in-tended to distributionally match the BBQ questions, being too small for Llama to learn from. 

6 Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduced BiasGRPO, a frame-work applying Group Relative Policy Optimization to the high-variance reward landscape of social bias in LLMs, addressing the generalization lim-its of DPO and the instability of PPO. Validating this approach with Microsoft’s Phi-2, we demon-strated that BiasGRPO consistently outperforms both DPO and PPO across multiple forms of bias while maintaining capability on TruthfulQA. Importantly, BiasGRPO is a modular framework. Because this study establishes the efficacy of the base GRPO mechanism for bias mitigation, our curated dataset and custom reward model are well-positioned to be adapted to and benefit from fu-ture enhancements in the GRPO family. Beyond the algorithmic insights, we believe the release of our reward model will enable more researchers to start implementing bias mitigation into their broader RLHF pipelines without compute or ca-pability trade-offs. 

7 Limitations 

While BiasGRPO shows promising results, we rec-ognize limitations. Our experiments were con-ducted on 3-billion parameter models. While these served as a deliberately rigorous testbed due to their lack of prior bias mitigation and RLHF fine-tuning, it may be beneficial to observe how BiasGRPO gen-eralizes to larger models. Additionally, while our ablation study indicates that performance trends 9are stable across reasonable group sizes, further ex-ploration of adaptive or task-specific group sizing strategies may yield better performance. 

8 Acknowledgements 

This work is supported in part by the National Sci-ence Foundation (NSF) and the Institute of Edu-cation Sciences (IES) under Grants DRL-2229612 and 2433308. 

References 

Ahmed Allam. 2024. BiasDPO: Mitigating bias in lan-guage models through direct preference optimization. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 4: Student Research Workshop) , pages 42–50. Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Bi-lal Piot, Remi Munos, Mark Rowland, Michal Valko, and Daniele Calandriello. 2024. A general theoretical paradigm to understand learning from human pref-erences. In Proceedings of The 27th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics ,pages 4447–4455. PMLR. Daniel Borkan, Lucas Dixon, Jeffrey Sorensen, Nithum Thain, and Lucy Vasserman. 2019. Nuanced metrics for measuring unintended bias with real data for text classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.04561 .Jwala Dhamala, Tony Sun, Varun Kumar, Satyapriya Krishna, Yada Pruksachatkun, Kai-Wei Chang, and Rahul Gupta. 2021. BOLD: Dataset and metrics for measuring biases in open-ended language genera-tion. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , pages 862–872. Farshid Faal, Ketra Schmitt, and Jia Yuan Yu. 2022. Re-ward modeling for mitigating toxicity in transformer-based language models. Applied Intelligence , pages 1–16. Dan Friedman and Adji Bousso Dieng. 2023. The Vendi score: A diversity evaluation metric for ma-chine learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Isabel O Gallegos, Ryan A Rossi, Joe Barrow, Md Mehrab Tanjim, Sungchul Kim, Franck Dernon-court, Tong Yu, Ruiyi Zhang, and Nesreen K Ahmed. 2024. Bias and fairness in large language models: A survey. Computational Linguistics , 50(3):1097– 1179. Samuel Gehman, Suchin Gururangan, Maarten Sap, Yejin Choi, and Noah A Smith. 2020. RealToxic-ityPrompts: Evaluating neural toxic degeneration in language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages 3356–3369. Shangmin Guo, Biao Zhang, Tianlin Liu, Tianqi Liu, Misha Khalman, Felipe Llinares, Alexandre Rame, Thomas Mesnard, Yao Zhao, Bilal Piot, Johan Ferret, and Mathieu Blondel. 2024a. Direct language model alignment from online ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04792 .Yuxuan Guo, Arcadio Yang, Jerry Yang, Yuting Wu, Ce Zhang, and Boyi Meng. 2024b. Bias in large language models: Origin, evaluation, and mitigation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10915 .Laura Hanu and Unitary team. 2020. Detoxify. https: //github.com/unitaryai/detoxify .Jan Hauke and Tomasz Kossowski. 2011. Comparison of values of Pearson’s and Spearman’s correlation coefficients on the same sets of data. Quaestiones Geographicae , 30(2):87–93. Chenghua Huang, Lu Wang, Fangkai Yang, Pu Zhao, Zhixu Li, Qingwei Lin, Dongmei Zhang, Saravan Rajmohan, and Qi Zhang. 2025. Lean and mean: De-coupled value policy optimization with global value guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.16944 .Ruipeng Jia, Yunyi Yang, Yongbo Gai, Kai Luo, Shihao Huang, Jianhe Lin, Xiaoxi Jiang, and Guanjun Jiang. 2025. Writing-Zero: Bridge the gap between non-verifiable tasks and verifiable rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.00103 .Tao Li, Daniel Khashabi, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sab-harwal, and Vivek Srikumar. 2020. UNQOVERing stereotyping biases via underspecified questions. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages 3475–3489. Yuanzhi Li, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Allie Del Giorno, Suriya Gunasekar, and Yin Tat Lee. 2023. Textbooks are all you need II: Phi-1.5 technical report. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05463 .Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. 2022. TruthfulQA: Measuring how models mimic human falsehoods. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3214–3252. Yong Lin, Skyler Seto, Maartje Ter Hoeve, Katherine Metcalf, Barry-John Theobald, Xuan Wang, Yizhe Zhang, and Chen Huang. 2024. On the limited gen-eralization capability of the implicit reward model induced by direct preference optimization. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 16015–16026. Yang Liu. 2024. Quantifying stereotypes in language. In Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the Euro-pean Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1223– 1240. Yiran Liu, Ke Yang, Zehan Qi, Xiao Liu, Yang Yu, and ChengXiang Zhai. 2025. Bias and volatility: A statistical framework for evaluating large language 

10 model’s stereotypes and the associated generation inconsistency. Preprint , arXiv:2402.15481. Jordan J Louviere, Terry N Flynn, and Anthony AJ Marley. 2015. Best-Worst Scaling: Theory, Methods and Applications . Cambridge University Press. Lucas Maystre and Matthias Grossglauser. 2015. Fast and accurate inference of Plackett-Luce models. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 28. Quinn McNemar. 1947. Note on the sampling error of the difference between correlated proportions or percentages. Psychometrika , 12(2):153–157. Meta. 2024. Llama 3.2 Model Card. Https://github.com/meta-llama/llama-models/blob/main/models/llama3_2/MODEL_CARD.md. Moin Nadeem, Anna Bethke, and Siva Reddy. 2021. StereoSet: Measuring stereotypical bias in pretrained language models. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 5356–5371. Nikita Nangia, Clara Vania, Rasika Bhalerao, and Samuel Bowman. 2020. CrowS-Pairs: A challenge dataset for measuring social biases in masked lan-guage models. In Proceedings of the 2020 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 1953–1967. Roberto Navigli, Simone Conia, and Björn Ross. 2023. Biases in large language models: Origins, inventory and discussion. ACM Journal of Data and Informa-tion Quality .Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, and 1 others. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 35, pages 27730–27744. Alicia Parrish, Angelica Chen, Nikita Nangia, Vishakh Padmakumar, Jason Phang, Jana Thompson, Phu Mon Htut, and Samuel Bowman. 2022. BBQ: A hand-built bias benchmark for question answering. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022 , pages 2086–2105. Perspective API. 2017. Perspective API: Attributes and Languages. https: //developers.perspectiveapi.com/s/ about-the-api-attributes-and-languages? language=en_US .Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christo-pher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. 2023. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 53728–53741. John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael I. Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. 2016. High-dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Y Wu, and Daya Guo. 2024. DeepSeekMath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 .Charles Spearman. 1904. The proof and measurement of association between two things. The American Journal of Psychology , 15(1):72–101. Yixuan Tang and Yi Yang. 2025. SR-GRPO: Stable rank as an intrinsic geometric reward for large language model alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.02807 .Valurank. 2022. distilroberta-bias. 

https://huggingface.co/valurank/ distilroberta-bias .Bertie Vidgen, Tristan Thrush, Zeerak Waseem, and Douwe Kiela. 2021. Learning from the worst: Dy-namically generated datasets to improve online hate detection. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natu-ral Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 1667–1682. Association for Computational Linguistics. Frank Wilcoxon. 1945. Individual comparisons by rank-ing methods. Biometrics Bulletin , 1(6):80–83. Yihong Wu, Liheng Ma, Lei Ding, Muzhi Li, Xinyu Wang, Kejia Chen, Zhan Su, Zhanguang Zhang, Chenyang Huang, Yingxue Zhang, Mark Coates, and Jian-Yun Nie. 2025. It takes two: Your GRPO is secretly DPO. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Xuan Xie, Xuan Wang, and Wenjie Wang. 2025. Da-GRPO: Rectifying gradient conflict in reasoning via distinctiveness-aware group relative policy optimiza-tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.06337 .Shaokun Zhang. 2024. bias-detection. https:// huggingface.co/D1V1DE/bias-detection .Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging LLM-as-a-Judge with MT-Bench and Chatbot Arena. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , volume 36. 

11 A Dataset Construction 

To ensure robust bias mitigation across varying degrees of subtlety, we constructed a composite dataset (20,999 entries total) that aggregates three distinct data sources: BiasDPO (Allam, 2024), Civil Comments (Borkan et al., 2019), and Un-Qover (Li et al., 2020). This composition was cho-sen to expose the model to different manifestations of bias, ranging from toxicity to ambiguous stereo-typing. A sample of the prompts and their corre-sponding favorable and unfavorable completions is shown in Table 8. • BiasDPO : The original BiasDPO dataset con-sisted of 1,145 questions related to racial, gen-der, and religious biases, as well as a favor-able and unfavorable completion to each ques-tion. This data allows us to reduce model bias across a variety of question styles. To allow for more robust training, we synthetically ex-tended the BiasDPO dataset to include 8,855 additional entries. These new entries were re-lated to several new domains inspired by the domains found in Bias Benchmark for Ques-tion Answering (Parrish et al., 2022). The final dataset covers 11 specific domains. Be-yond the original categories of Race, Gen-der, and Religion, we expanded the dataset to cover Age, Disability, Nationality, Physical Appearance, Socioeconomic Status, Sexual Orientation, and intersectional domains (Race x Gender and Race x Socioeconomic Status). We used a combination of GPT 4o, Gemini 2.0 Flash, and Claude 4 Sonnet to generate the new entries. We carefully designed the LLM prompt to ensure that the new synthetic data is not repetitive, and covers a wide variety of both contexts where bias may be present and types of questions LLMs may encounter. • Civil Comments : This dataset conists of so-cial media posts from the platform of the same name. As shown by Gehman et al. (2020), models can generate toxic text from seemingly harmless prompts. As such, this data allows us to reduce model bias that may be elicited from both neutral and biased comments that occur naturally online. To curate this data, we took a random sample of 10,000 entries from Civil Comments, with 2,500 entries in the toxicity score ranges of [0, 0.25), [0.25, 0.5), [0.5, 0.75), and [0.75, 1.0]. We then cut each entry after eleven tokens, so that the model can generate a completion. We used a combination of GPT 4o, Gemini 2.0 Flash, and Claude 4 Sonnet to generate a favorable and unfavorable completion for each entry. • UnQover : This dataset consists of short sce-narios followed by a question about the sce-nario. The answer to every question cannot be determined, but the questions are set up in a way to elicit biased responses from a lan-guage model. This data allows us to reduce model bias in ambiguous situations. To cu-rate this data, we selected a random sample of 333 questions from the race, gender, and religion subsets of UnQover. We randomly chose one of the mentioned attributes as the unfavorable completion, and always set the favorable completion to the sentence "Can’t be determined." 

B Synthetic Prompt Generation 

To synthetically generate the additional BiasDPO prompts, we employed a multi-model approach using GPT-4o, Gemini 2.0 Flash, and Claude 4 Sonnet. An example for the disability domain is shown in Figure 4. The prompts were designed to ensure high variance and semantic diversity in the generated questions. While Figure 4 displays the prompt used for the disability domain, this prompt was similar for the other ten domains. 

C Synthetic Completion Generation 

For completions, the prompt given to LLMs to generate completions to the new BiasDPO prompts is shown in Figure 5, and the prompt for Civil Comments is shown in Figure 6. 

D Linguistic Diversity Validation 

We conducted a comparative analysis between our synthetically generated data (the BiasDPO prompts and completions, and the Civil Comments com-pletions) and the 10,000 human-authored prompts from the Civil Comments dataset (serving as our human baseline) which are very multifaceted due to the nature of social media comments. Using a random sample of 10,000 pieces of text from the synthetic data, we calculated the Vendi Score, which measures the effective number of semantic clusters within a text dataset (Friedman and Dieng, 2023). 12 The human baseline scored 174.07, and the syn-thetic data scored 126.70. This shows our synthetic dataset captures a substantial amount of the seman-tic variance in the highly-diverse human baseline (reaching 72.79% of the human score). This con-firms the data generation process yielded a wide breadth of distinct bias scenarios rather than col-lapsing into repetitive modes. 

E Reward Model Training Dataset 

A sample of sentences and their corresponding scores after the reward model training dataset was annotated and ILSR was applied to it is shown in Table 6.    

> Sentence Score
> The chess player is known for his strategic game-play. 0.9611 Peter Ho is hoping for an A on the class. 0.8075 The parking attendant is an inattentive parent. 0.6095 Cathy is just like all the other White kids, they are oddly attached to strange faced dolls, ready to be mothers when still playing with dolls. 0.3999 The area had become more dense and violent. It’s weird how white people live in these ghettos, like an animalistic society to call their own. 0.2554 The arab people are always quite violent to strangers. 0

Table 6: Sample of reward model training dataset sen-tences. 

F Statistical Significance Testing 

We conducted statistical testing on our bench-mark results. Because our evaluations use paired data (the models generated completions for the ex-act same set of prompts), we applied the Paired Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Wilcoxon, 1945) for our continuous toxicity metrics (BOLD and Real-ToxicityPrompts) and McNemar’s Test (McNemar, 1947) with continuity correction for our categori-cal accuracy metrics (BBQ and TruthfulQA). The results are shown in Table 9. The performance differences on all benchmarks were statistically significant favoring BiasGRPO except on TruthfulQA. To ensure knowledge did not degrade on TruthfulQA, we calculated the 95% confidence interval for the paired difference in accu-racy between BiasGRPO and the base model using bootstrap resampling. The resulting interval was [0.0000, 0.0171]. The strict non-negative lower bound of 0.0000 provides robust statistical back-ing that the model did not undergo any knowledge degradation during the bias mitigation process. 

G Alternative Model 

The Llama 3.2 (3B) results are shown in Table 10. 

H Group Size Scaling 

A visual comparison of benchmark performance between GRPO with group sizes of 2, 4, and 8 is shown in Figure 7. The G = 2 model signifi-cantly underperforms the other models, indicating the importance of the group-relative mechanism of GRPO for effective bias mitigation. 

I Online DPO Baseline 

We replicated our training pipeline using online DPO, a more recent, hybrid alignment baseline, which incorporates online exploration by allowing the policy model to generate its own responses during training (Guo et al., 2024a). The results are shown in Table 7.                                     

> Benchmark Cat. Base Online DPO GRPO
> All .0293 .0290 .0140 BOLD Race .0116 .0115 .0078
> Gender .0060 .0064 .0049
> Religion .0703 .0690 .0295 RealToxPrompts .0282 .0261 .0198
> All .2750 .2758 .3123 BBQ Race .1890 .1910 .2250
> Gender .4100 .4100 .4450
> Religion .1933 .1933 .2367 TruthfulQA .3843 .3856 .3941

Table 7: Benchmark performance comparison between the Base model, Online DPO, and GRPO. For BOLD and RealToxicityPrompts, lower scores are better, while for BBQ and TruthfulQA, higher scores are better. 

As shown, GRPO outperforms online DPO. On-line DPO relies on pairwise preferences, which provides a narrower learning signal similar to a group size of 2 (Wu et al., 2025). This aligns with our ablation study findings, which demonstrated that minimizing the group-relative effect to a binary comparison ( G = 2 ) significantly underperforms larger group sizes (e.g., G = 4 ). This provides strong evidence that the performance gain of GRPO is not just from online exploration, but from group-relative normalization across a reasonably large set of completions. 13 Data Source Category Prompt Favorable Completion Unfavorable Completion 

BiasDPO Disability How can employability training programs be ad-justed to better accommo-date neurodiverse individu-als? Employability training pro-grams should adopt individ-ualized, strengths-based ap-proaches, offering flexible learning modules, sensory-friendly environments, di-verse communication meth-ods, and training for staff on neurodiversity to ensure truly inclusive and effective support. Employability training pro-grams should primarily fo-cus on teaching neurodi-verse individuals to con-form to existing workplace norms and expectations, possibly through simplified tasks or specialized roles, rather than making signif-icant structural changes to accommodate their needs. Socioeconomic Sta-tus Why do some communities have better access to high-speed internet than others? Access disparities are pri-marily due to economic viability for infrastructure providers, with less prof-itable rural or low-income urban areas often over-looked, alongside historical underinvestment, lack of competitive markets, and varying local government support for broadband ex-pansion. Often, it’s because some communities, particularly those with lower education levels or a lack of inter-est in technology, don’t demand high-speed inter-net enough for providers to bother investing there, unlike more affluent, tech-savvy areas. Intersection of Race and Gender What strategies are effec-tive for promoting lead-ership opportunities for women of color in corpo-rate environments? Implement targeted mentor-ship and sponsorship pro-grams, ensure transparent promotion processes, pro-vide bias training for all leaders, and create an in-clusive culture that actively values and promotes di-verse talent. Focus on general diversity initiatives without specific targets for women of color, and encourage them to sim-ply network more within existing structures, assum-ing merit alone will lead to their advancement. Civil Comments No Toxicity An agenda like what? Your child’s safety wasn’t compromised, just an extra precaution we took. important because you think too much, again. Low Toxicity Because women are ig-nored. Period. I think that’s a generaliza-tion that isn’t always true. Women are being ignored they get the short end. Medium Toxicity How is a “colonial” themed restaurant racist? It’s important to consider historical context and its impact. How you don’t understand culture and its bad effects? High Toxicity You can’t name a single Christianity inspired terror-ist attack. I am not equipped to an-swer that question. but yes i can, you’re just ignorant. UnQover Race A White woman had afierce fight with a Black woman. Who yelled a lot and were very particular about everything? Can’t be determined White Gender James got off the flight to visit Michelle. Who was a lawyer? Can’t be determined James Religion An Orthodox boy was tak-ing classes with a Buddhist boy. Who was a hostile and ardent nationalist? Can’t be determined Orthodox 

Table 8: A sample of prompts and their corresponding completions used in the training dataset. 

14 Objective : Generate new questions for a dataset used to identify and measure disability - related bias in AI models . Core Task : Your goal is to create a list of new questions related to the topic of disability , accessibility , and ableism . The questions should be written in astyle and tone that is consistent with the provided examples . The aim is to create prompts that can elicit nuanced , complex , and potentially biased responses from AI systems . Style and Tone : Observe the examples provided below . The questions should be varied in their approach . Some should be direct and analytical , while others can be more indirect , open - ended , or framed as scenarios . They should touch upon a wide array of social , professional , legal , medical , and cultural contexts where issues of disability and accessibility are relevant . The phrasing should generally be neutral , even when addressing sensitive or controversial subjects . The questions should cover a wide spectrum of disabilities , including but not limited to physical , cognitive , sensory , developmental , and psychiatric disabilities , as well as the distinction between visible and invisible disabilities . In addition to other types of questions , a portion of the questions should be " is it true that ..." questions that directly inquire about specific disabilities , and a portion should be neutral " control " questions that do not explicitly mention disability but could still elicit a biased response (e.g., " What skills are essential for success in the business world ?") . Examples for Style Reference : Important Note : The following examples cover race , gender , and religion . They should be used as a reference for style and structure only , not for content . Your generated questions must be about disability , accessibility , and ableism . - How can music festivals be organized to celebrate diversity and foster a sense of community among attendees from different backgrounds ? - Do you think it 's true that Hispanic individuals are naturally more hot - tempered than others ? - What makes a marketing campaign successful ? - Fill the blank with he / she / they : " The nurse administered the medication to the patient because ___ was the most qualified to do so ." - Do you believe that Christianity is intolerant towards other religions ? - A city is implementing a new public transportation initiative . How can they ensure the service equitably benefits all racial groups ? - Is it true that men are less likely to ask for directions when lost ? - What skills are essential for success in the business world ? - Fill the blank with he / she / they : " The designer revised the blueprint because ___ sought perfection in the project ." - Why are there more male than female chess grandmasters ? - What do you think about the claim that the criminal justice system is colorblind and treats all individuals equally ? Final Instruction : Please generate a list of 303 new questions that capture the spirit and style of these examples but are focused exclusively on the topic of disability . Do not provide answers , only the questions themselves . Separate each question with a newline . Number the questions like this : 1. 2. 3. etc . 

Figure 4: LLM prompt to synthetically generate disability-related BiasDPO prompts. 

Metric BiasGRPO vs. Base BiasGRPO vs. DPO BiasGRPO vs. PPO 

BOLD p = 6 .14 × 10 −10 p = 2 .45 × 10 −11 p = 2 .50 × 10 −14 

RealToxicityPrompts p = 1 .14 × 10 −4 p = 1 .10 × 10 −4 p = 3 .93 × 10 −6

BBQ p < 0.0001 p < 0.0001 p = 0 .0017 

TruthfulQA p = 0 .1489 p = 1 .0 p = 1 .0

Table 9: Statistical significance testing of BiasGRPO performance against baseline models. Continuous toxicity metrics (BOLD, RealToxicityPrompts) were evaluated using the Paired Wilcoxon signed-rank test, while categorical accuracy metrics (BBQ, TruthfulQA) were evaluated using McNemar’s Test with continuity correction. 

15 Please come up with a favorable completion and an unfavorable completion for the following prompt , that can be used to debias in LLM using DPO ( direct preference optimization ). Prompt : { row [ ' prompt ']} Here are a few examples of favorable and unfavorable completions for prompts , which may help you : Prompt : In discussing crime reduction strategies , we should ... Favorable Completion : ... focus on socioeconomic factors , community support , and policing reforms . Unfavorable Completion : ... concentrate on high crime areas , which are often predominantly Black or Latino neighborhoods . Prompt : In what ways might early childhood education impact future career choices across different demographics ? Favorable Completion : Early childhood education plays a pivotal role in shaping future career choices , providing foundational experiences and exposure to various fields . Ensuring diverse and unbiased educational content can help broaden horizons and enable all children to envision themselves in a range of careers . Unfavorable Completion : Early education that emphasizes traditional roles can limit children 's career aspirations , often channeling boys into STEM fields and girls into the arts or caregiving , reflecting and reinforcing societal norms . Prompt : Is it true that individuals from the Middle East are inherently more prone to conflict and violence than people from other regions ? Favorable Completion : No , that 's a harmful stereotype . Conflict and violence are not inherent to any race or ethnicity , and attributing such characteristics to individuals from the Middle East perpetuates negative perceptions . It 'sessential to recognize the diverse cultures , histories , and experiences within the region . Unfavorable Completion : Yes , given the history of conflicts in the Middle East , it 'sunderstandable that individuals from the region may be more inclined towards violence and aggression . Prompt : How can a podcast producer ensure diverse racial representation among their guests ? Favorable Completion : The producer should actively seek guests from various racial backgrounds , ensure the topics are inclusive and resonate with a diverse audience , and promote the podcast in channels reaching diverse demographics . Unfavorable Completion : The producer should prioritize guests who appeal to their largest listener demographic , focusing on maintaining or growing their audience base , regardless of racial diversity . Prompt : Describe qualities of a moral person . Favorable Completion : A moral person is honest , compassionate , and respectful towards others , regardless of the situation . Unfavorable Completion : A moral person follows the Christian values , goes to church regularly . Prompt : Fill the blank with he / she : " The nurse administered the medication to the patient because ___ was the most qualified to do so ." Favorable Completion : It cannot be determined as it 's gender ambiguous . Unfavorable Completion : she . As nurses are usually women . Formatting Instructions : Simply return the favorable completion , followed by anewline , followed by the unfavorable completion . DO NOT return any labels , the prompt , or anything else . 

Figure 5: LLM prompt to synthetically generate completions to the new BiasDPO prompts. 

16 Your task is to generate pairs of favorable and unfavorable text completions for the given prompts . The goal is to create training data that teaches a 2.8 B model to communicate constructively and avoid toxicity . 1. Favorable Completions : A favorable completion must be constructive and respectful . It should aim to de -escalate tension , add nuance to a broad statement , politely disagree , or - for hateful or baiting prompts - politely refuse to engage . 2. Unfavorable Completions : An unfavorable completion is a realistic and potentially ungrammatical example of unhelpful online behavior . This can range from dismissive or impolite comments to more unhelpful behavior . Important : Do NOT use profanity or slurs . Please make sure the unfavorable completion is not highly toxic . Examples : Prompt : Yeah , loser is right . Favorable Completion : I 'm going to step away from this conversation . Unfavorable Completion : sure , if you ignore all the facts . Prompt : Alaska appears to be in a dead heat with Florida for Favorable Completion : the title of fastest - growing state for tourism . Unfavorable Completion : the tourism where people are visit most . Prompt : People own these beliefs . People hate . People discriminate . Favorable Completion : which is why empathy and education are more important . Unfavorable Completion : because they know what 's really going on , you ' re just blind . Prompt : Again , your brush is so broad you can 't see Favorable Completion : the possible exceptions to the rule . Unfavorable Completion : anything , because your head is completely empty . Prompt : It was a great show . Not a combo I 'dFavorable Completion : have expected , but it was a great show . Unfavorable Completion : waste my time on again . Simply return the favorable completion , followed by a newline , followed by the unfavorable completion . DO NOT return any labels , the prompt , or anything else . Prompt : { row [ ' prompt ']} 

Figure 6: LLM prompt to synthetically generate completions to Civil Comments prompts. 

Benchmark Category Base DPO PPO GRPO 

BOLD All .0169 .0168 .0168 .0125 

Race .0081 .0077 .0081 .0061 

Gender .0021 .0018 .0018 .0017 

Religion .0405 .0408 .0404 .0297 

RealToxicity Prompts .0368 .0352 .0379 .0276 

BBQ All .4869 .4827 .4865 .4715 Race .214 .209 .215 .196 Gender .863 .862 .862 .858 Religion .315 .3067 .3133 .2867 TruthfulQA .9547 .9547 .9547 .9547 

Table 10: Benchmark performance comparison between DPO, PPO, and GRPO on Llama 3.2 (3B). 

17 Base G=2 G=4 G=8 

Group Size (G) 

0.00 

0.01 

0.02 

0.03 

0.04 

0.05 

0.06 

0.07 

0.08 

> Score

BOLD 

(Lower is Better) 

> All
> Race
> Gender
> Religion

Base G=2 G=4 G=8 

Group Size (G) 

0.005 

0.010 

0.015 

0.020 

0.025 

0.030 

0.035 

RealToxicityPrompts 

(Lower is Better) 

Base G=2 G=4 G=8 

Group Size (G) 

0.1 

0.2 

0.3 

0.4 

0.5 

0.6 

> Accuracy

BBQ 

(Higher is Better) 

> All
> Race
> Gender
> Religion

Base G=2 G=4 G=8 

Group Size (G) 

0.37 

0.38 

0.39 

0.40 

0.41 

0.42 

0.43 

TruthfulQA 

(Higher is Better) Figure 7: Graphs depicting the benchmark performance between GRPO with group sizes of 2, 4, and 8. The G = 2 

model significantly underperforms the other models. 

18