Title: EasyOPD: An Easy-to-use On-Policy Distillation Framework for Large Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.11012v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Jul 2026 02:13:06 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# EasyOPD: An Easy-to-use On-Policy Distillation Framework for Large Language Models 

Jie Sun 1,3,∗,§, Mao Zheng 2,∗, Mingyang Song 2,∗, Qiyong Zhong 1,∗,§

Gengsheng Li 1,∗,§, Zhepei Hong 1, Chang Wu 1, Pengfei Liu 3

Junfeng Fang 4,†, Xiang Wang 1,† 

> 1

University of Science and Technology of China 2 LLM Department, Tencent  

> 3

Shanghai Innovation Institute 4 National University of Singapore 

§ https://github.com/lds-ustc/EasyOPD 

Abstract 

Conventional language-model distillation often relies on fixed teacher-generated data, which may not cover the states encountered by an evolving student policy. On-policy distilla-tion (OPD) instead collects teacher or eval-uator supervision on student-generated roll-outs. However, existing OPD methods dif-fer substantially in supervision form, tokenizer compatibility, teacher access, and supervision granularity, leading to fragmented implemen-tations that are difficult to reproduce and ex-tend. We present E ASY OPD, an on-policy distillation framework built on verl, a dis-tributed reinforcement-learning framework for large language models. E ASY OPD separates user-side configuration, method-specific super-vision logic, and verl-based execution. Its method modules connect to the shared back-end through extension boundaries for loss con-struction, rollout metadata, reward processing, tokenizer alignment, and teacher-side compu-tation. We instantiate representative methods for three OPD settings—cross-tokenizer OPD, on-policy self-distillation, and step-wise OPD. Experiments on reasoning, code-generation, scientific-knowledge, and tool-use benchmarks show that these implementations can be ex-ecuted through the same verl-based backend while retaining their method-specific objectives and task-dependent performance profiles. We release E ASY OPD with runnable YAML con-figurations, documentation, and an installable demonstration package and video. 

1 Introduction 

Large language model distillation transfers capabil-ities from a stronger teacher to a smaller, more effi-cient student, aiming to reduce deployment costs while retaining reasoning, coding, and instruction-following abilities (Alkhulaifi et al., 2021). Con-ventional distillation uses teacher responses or to-      

> ∗Equal Contribution. †Corresponding Authors.
> §Work done during internship at Tencent.

ken distributions on fixed contexts (Yang et al., 2024b). At inference, however, the student condi-tions on its own prefixes and may encounter con-texts poorly covered by offline supervision (Gu et al., 2024; Ko et al., 2024). On-policy distil-lation (OPD) mitigates this mismatch through a common loop: the current student generates roll-outs, a teacher or evaluator supervises them, and the resulting signals guide student updates (Song and Zheng, 2026; Lu and Thinking Machines Lab, 2025). OPD methods vary by supervision interface, tokenizer compatibility, and granularity, with over-lapping settings including logit-based distillation, cross-tokenizer alignment (Sun et al., 2026), on-policy self-distillation, black-box or rubric-based feedback, and step-wise or multi-turn agentic su-pervision (Zhong et al., 2026; Li et al., 2026a). A shared algorithmic paradigm does not yield a common system interface. Depending on the super-vision, OPD may span rollout generation, teacher inference, cross-tokenizer alignment, reward con-struction, distributed data flow, and optimization. For example, cross-tokenizer OPD requires align-ment across teacher and student tokenizations be-fore constructing compatible supervision, whereas black-box or rubric-based OPD may convert textual judgments or scores into rewards; these patterns require different extension points. Existing frame-works address complementary parts of the OPD workflow: TRL (von Werra et al., 2020) provides trainer-centric distillation APIs; verl (Sheng et al., 2024) and slime (Zhu et al., 2025) support scalable on-policy rollout and distributed execution; and KDFlow (Zhang et al., 2026) provides a distillation-oriented stack. However, as summarized in Table 1, we find no single reviewed framework that docu-ments method-local extension boundaries across the heterogeneous supervision interfaces consid-ered here while reusing a common distributed back-end. This gap calls for a lightweight OPD abstrac-arXiv:2607.11012v1 [cs.CL] 13 Jul 2026 EasyOPD : A Three -Layer Framework for  Unified  OPD  

> 1

User Layer  Minimal user -side invocation   

> YAML Configs
> gkd.yaml ,simct.yaml , ...
> Python / CLI
> EasyOPD.from_hparams (...)
> Examples
> reproducible scripts
> 2

EasyOPD Layer        

> Registry
> method
> registration
> Methods
> Unified OPD method library
> GKD MiniLLM OPSD SRPO SimCT SOD ...
> 3

verl Execution Substrate  

> Trainer
> PPO / Distillation
> Rollout Engine
> Generation & Rollout
> Reward Manager
> Reward Computation
> Distributed
> Workers
> Scalable execution
> Model Forward /
> Logit Processor Parallel Execution
> Efficient scaling

EasyOPD separates user -side invocation, method -level OPD logic, and verl execution .

> Config
> unified
> hyperparameters
> Utils
> shared tools
> Metrics
> training
> statistics

1 User  

> Choose method,
> config, and script.

2 EasyOPD 

> Unify OPD methods .

3 ver l          

> Execute distributed
> training .
> Switch methods
> by changing
> YAML only !
> Method -local OPD extensions
> loss alignment rollout reward teacher sidecar Minimal hooks
> Preserve verl as the stable execution substrate

Figure 1: Architecture of E ASY OPD. The user layer provides configuration-based invocation, the E ASY OPD layer encapsulates method-local OPD logic, and verl provides distributed execution. Hooks for loss, rollout, reward, alignment, and teacher-side computation connect method modules to verl, allowing supported methods to share the same execution backend and be selected via YAML configurations. 

tion linking method-specific supervision to a shared execution substrate. To fill this gap, we present E ASY OPD, a unified OPD framework built on verl. E ASY OPD reuses verl for rollout generation, model execution, and optimization while adding a lightweight abstraction layer for method-local supervision. Method mod-ules connect to the shared training flow through explicit extension points: cross-tokenizer methods localize alignment and supervision construction, whereas black-box or rubric-based methods local-ize feedback acquisition and training-signal con-struction. This design turns OPD integration from framework-wide modification into method-local extension. To realize this design, E ASY OPD adopts the three-layer architecture shown in Figure 1. The user layer provides Python and CLI entry points and YAML configurations for methods, models, datasets, and hyperparameters; the E ASY OPD layer manages method registration, method-local modules, and supervision diagnostics, connecting to verl through dispatch hooks for loss, rollout metadata, reward, alignment, and teacher-side com-putation; and the verl layer handles distributed roll-out, model execution, worker orchestration, reward computation, and optimization. Users select meth-ods through configuration, while developers add a method by registering a method-local module with the required hooks, so that the core trainer and workers reach method-specific supervision only through the shared dispatch layer. We instantiate this design with representative methods across three settings: cross-tokenizer OPD, on-policy self-distillation, and step-wise OPD; its extension boundaries are further designed to accommodate additional supervision forms such as black-box or rubric-based feedback. Within each setting, the compared methods share the model ini-tialization, training data, execution backend, and evaluation procedure where applicable, while re-taining their original supervision designs. We re-lease the code under the Apache License 2.0 on GitHub with reproducible YAML configurations, documentation, an installable demonstration pack-age, and a demonstration video. 

2 Background and Motivation 

Previous Solutions. Knowledge distillation (KD) typically trains a smaller student model to imitate the predictive behavior of a larger or more capable teacher (Hinton et al., 2015; Ko et al., 2024). For autoregressive language models, common offline approaches include sequence-level distillation, in which the student is trained on teacher-generated sequences (Kim and Rush, 2016), and supervised token-level KD, in which the student matches the teacher’s next-token distributions along pre-fixes induced by a fixed offline set of output se-quences (Agarwal et al., 2024). These output se-quences may be ground-truth or teacher-generated. In their purely offline form, both approaches opti-mize over an output-prefix distribution that does not track the current student’s rollout distribution. During autoregressive inference, however, the stu-dent conditions on its own previous predictions. A deviation can therefore shift subsequent prefixes away from those observed during offline distilla-tion, creating a training–inference distribution mis-match and allowing errors to compound across de-coding steps (Lin et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2024). 

On-Policy Distillation Mechanism. On-policy distillation (OPD) collects teacher supervision on outputs generated by the current student, rather than relying only on fixed offline sequences. Dur-ing training, the student generates responses or trajectories, and the teacher provides supervision on the resulting prefixes or states. The student is then updated, and new rollouts are generated with the updated policy. In a common white-box setting, the teacher provides next-token distribu-tions on student-generated prefixes, and the stu-dent minimizes a token-level divergence from the teacher (Agarwal et al., 2024). The defining prop-erty of OPD is therefore that supervision is col-lected on states induced by the current student, rather than the use of any particular distillation objective (Lu and Thinking Machines Lab, 2025; Song and Zheng, 2026). Training on student-generated states helps re-duce the mismatch between offline training data and the prefixes encountered during autoregressive inference, while providing guidance on errors made by the student itself (Agarwal et al., 2024; Ko et al., 2024). However, OPD also turns distillation into an iterative pipeline that must coordinate student rollout, teacher inference, supervision construction, and model optimization. Since OPD methods dif-fer in teacher access, feedback form, and train-ing objectives (Song and Zheng, 2026), a practi-cal framework should support this shared pipeline while allowing method-specific supervision to be implemented consistently. 

3 Design and Implementation 

EasyOPD provides a unified OPD training pro-cess on top of verl. Instead of treating each OPD method as an isolated training script, it decomposes an OPD run into four reusable stages: method in-vocation, configuration resolution, supervision con-struction, and distributed execution. This section describes how these stages form a unified workflow that connects diverse OPD methods to the same verl execution substrate. 

3.1 A Unified OPD Workflow 

Although OPD methods differ in their supervi-sion interfaces, they share a common training flow. Given a teacher model, a student model, and train-ing data, the student first generates on-policy roll-outs; the selected method then constructs super-vision on these rollouts, such as teacher logits, aligned token distributions, judge rewards, or step-level feedback; finally, the training system con-sumes this supervision through loss computation, reward aggregation, or trajectory-level weighting. EasyOPD makes this shared process explicit and standardizes invocation and dispatch, without re-quiring all methods to share a single loss, teacher interface, or evaluation metric. As shown in Fig-ure 1, the user layer specifies what to run, the Easy-OPD layer defines how supervision is constructed, and the verl layer executes the resulting training process on top of its distributed runtime (Sheng et al., 2024). 

3.2 Declarative Invocation and Configuration 

EasyOPD exposes OPD methods through declar-ative configurations and launch scripts. Released methods can be selected through method-specific YAML configurations without manually editing rollout workers, reward managers, logit proces-sors, or trainer-side loss assembly, which turns method selection into a configuration-level op-eration and makes experiments easier to repro-duce. Figure 2 shows a concrete running exam-ple in which the same from_hparams entry point and a single launch command drive all three stud-ied settings—cross-tokenizer OPD, on-policy self-distillation, and step-wise OPD—together with their baselines, changing only the method name and its YAML configuration. Different OPD methods require different options: logit-based methods may specify divergence direc-tions or top-k support; cross-tokenizer methods may specify alignment or overlap-vocabulary be-havior; rubric-based methods may specify judge prompts or reward aggregation rules; step-wise methods may specify trajectory segmentation or weighting strategies. EasyOPD keeps these choices in a unified configuration space and resolves them Table 1: Comparison of OPD supervision interfaces and framework properties. ✓ denotes native or first-class support, ◦ denotes partial or experimental support, and × denotes no documented support. On-policy self-distillation 

refers to settings in which the teacher is derived from the student model and supervises student-generated rollouts. The comparison reflects publicly documented functionality as of July 2026, using the versions or commits listed in Appendix A, where per-cell evidence is also provided. 

OPD supervision-interface coverage Framework properties Framework OPD Cross-tok. OPD On-policy self-distill. Step-wise OPD Released YAML/CLI Documented method extension API Compatible w/ multi-node TRL ✓ ◦ ◦ × ✓ × ◦

verl ✓ × × ◦ ✓ × ✓

slime ✓ × ◦ ◦ ✓ × ✓

KDFlow ✓ ✓ ✓ × ✓ ◦ ◦

Ours ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ (via verl) 

One entry point for every OPD setting in E ASY OPD                      

> from easyopd import EasyOPD
> print (EasyOPD.list_methods()) # [..., 'simct ','uld ','alm ','dskd ','sdpo ','sod ', ...] # The SAME call selects any method; only the name + YAML change. m = EasyOPD.from_hparams("simct", config_path="easyopd/config/simct.yaml") # cross-tokenizer OPD (uld|alm|dskd) m = EasyOPD.from_hparams("sdpo", config_path="easyopd/config/sdpo.yaml") # on-policy self-distillation (vs grpo) m = EasyOPD.from_hparams("sod", config_path="easyopd/config/sod.yaml") # step-wise OPD (vs response-level opd, grpo) # Each method (and its baselines) is one launch script; the config selects the method and the hooks it activates. $ bash examples/simct/run_simct.sh # cross-tokenizer: uld|alm|dskd $ bash examples/sdpo/run_sdpo.sh # self-distillation: grpo $ bash examples/sod/run_sod.sh # step-wise: response-level opd, grpo # The registry activates only the hooks a method needs and logs supervision-specific diagnostics: #simct -> alignment + teacher sidecar + loss : simct/xtok_kd_loss, simple/teacher_loss_tokens_mean #sdpo -> reprompt self-teacher + loss : actor/sdpo/loss, self_distillation/reprompt_sample_fraction #sod -> step-wise KL reweighting : actor/token_kl, stepwise_opd_coef

Figure 2: A running example of E ASY OPD. The three studied settings—cross-tokenizer OPD, on-policy self-distillation, and step-wise OPD—and their baselines are all reached through the same from_hparams entry point or a single launch script, changing only the method name and its YAML config. The registry then activates only the hooks each method needs, verl performs rollout and optimization, and E ASY OPD reports supervision-specific diagnostics. All API calls, method names, launch commands, and diagnostic metric names are taken from the released repository. 

through method registration, so new methods can be added without hard-coding method choices into the trainer. 

3.3 Method-Local Supervision Logic 

The core of EasyOPD is to localize OPD-specific supervision logic: a method defines how supervi-sion is obtained, transformed, consumed, and di-agnosed. Standard OPD may only require a token-level distillation objective, cross-tokenizer OPD may require tokenizer or span alignment and a common supervision space, rubric-based OPD may convert judge feedback into rewards, and step-wise OPD may attach feedback to intermediate reason-ing states or multi-turn trajectories. EasyOPD does not force these methods into a single loss-only ab-straction; it gives each a local space to implement the supervision interface it needs. Method-local logic also includes diagnostics. Implemented method modules expose supervision-specific diagnostics in addition to task performance, so users can check whether the intended supervi-sion signal is active, not only the final loss. For example, the released cross-tokenizer implementa-tion reports the overlap-vocabulary size, the num-ber of valid and span-level aligned segments, the count of skipped samples, and the valid-span ra-tio, while the step-wise implementation reports the mean step-level weight and the number of super-vised steps. These metrics help users debug failures that final task performance alone cannot explain. 3.4 Execution through Thin verl Hooks 

EasyOPD reuses verl as the execution substrate in-stead of reimplementing distributed training. verl provides the system-heavy components required by OPD, including rollout generation, reward com-putation, model forwarding, logit processing, dis-tributed workers, trainer-side optimization, and par-allel execution, and EasyOPD connects method-local supervision logic to this substrate through a small set of thin hooks. A hook is a dispatch boundary rather than a method implementation: it exposes a stable in-teraction point in the training pipeline and routes the corresponding data or control flow to the se-lected method module. The hook set covers the main entry points of OPD supervision: loss hooks for token- or distribution-level supervision, roll-out hooks for trajectory metadata, reward hooks for judge or rubric feedback, alignment hooks for token- or span-level mapping, and teacher-sidecar hooks for teacher-side signals such as logits, hid-den states, or judge outputs, as used respectively by logit-based, feature-based (Zhang et al., 2024), and rubric-based methods. This design balances expressiveness and main-tainability. Writing every method directly into verl would create method-specific branches, while ex-posing only a single fixed interface would make alignment-, reward-, or trajectory-based OPD meth-ods difficult to express. Thin hooks keep method logic local while verl remains the shared backend. EasyOPD thus inherits rollout generation, worker orchestration, optimization, and distributed execu-tion from verl; its contribution is the dispatch layer connecting these components to method-local su-pervision logic. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup 

We evaluate E ASY OPD in three settings that ex-ercise different method-specific interfaces. Cross-tokenizer OPD requires supervision across differ-ent teacher and student tokenizations. On-policy self-distillation instantiates teacher and student policies from the same model under different con-ditioning contexts. Step-wise OPD assigns supervi-sion to intermediate reasoning or tool-interaction steps. These settings cover variation in supervi-sion space, teacher conditioning, and supervision granularity, and are not intended to form a single cross-regime leaderboard across methods. 

Cross-tokenizer OPD. Standard OPD directly compares teacher and student next-token distribu-tions, which are not naturally aligned under dif-ferent tokenizers; cross-tokenizer methods address this by constructing a shared supervision space. We compare SimCT (Sun et al., 2026), ULD (Boizard et al., 2025), ALM (Minixhofer et al., 2025), and DSKD (Zhang et al., 2024), distilling Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct (Yang et al., 2024a) into Phi-4-mini-Instruct (Abouelenin et al., 2025). All methods start from the same student checkpoint, warm-started on a shared 10K teacher-generated math and code corpus, and use the same training prompts and optimization budget. We evaluate on MATH500 (Lightman et al., 2024), GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), MBPP (Austin et al., 2021), and Live-CodeBench v6 (Jain et al., 2025), reporting exact-match accuracy for reasoning and pass@1 for code. 

On-policy self-distillation. On-policy self-distillation (OPSD) uses the same base model under different conditioning contexts: the stu-dent generates a response from the original prompt, while the self-teacher re-evaluates it with additional feedback. We instantiate this setting with SDPO (Hübotter et al., 2026), using Qwen3-8B (Qwen Team, 2025) as both the student and self-teacher, and compare it with the base model and GRPO (Shao et al., 2024). We evaluate Chemistry from SciKnowEval (Feng et al., 2024), Biology from SciKnowEval (Feng et al., 2024), Tool Use from ToolAlpaca (Tang et al., 2023), and mathematical reasoning on GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021). We report the highest Average@16 reached within one-hour and five-hour wall-clock budgets, where Average@16 is the mean correctness over 16 independently sampled responses per question. 

Step-wise OPD. Response-level OPD (Agarwal et al., 2024) applies teacher supervision uniformly across a trajectory, although supervision on later steps may become less reliable after erroneous tool interactions, a common failure mode as LLMs are deployed as long-horizon, tool-use, and research agents (Xiao et al., 2025; Li et al., 2026b; Feng et al., 2026; Wu et al., 2025; Fu et al., 2026b; Zeng et al., 2026; Fu et al., 2026a). SOD (Zhong et al., 2026) instead reweights the distillation loss by step-level student–teacher divergence. We use Qwen3-1.7B (Qwen Team, 2025) as the student and a GRPO-optimized Qwen3-4B (Zhong et al., 2026) as the teacher, comparing the base model, GRPO (Shao et al., 2024), response-level OPD, and Table 2: Cross-tokenizer OPD results. Reasoning scores are exact-match accuracy, code scores are pass@1, and Avg. is their unweighted mean. Best per column in bold.                               

> Method MATH500 GSM8K MBPP LCB-v6 Avg. Base 54.2 86.0 53.2 7.4 50.2 ULD 57.0 85.1 55.4 9.1 51.7 ALM 58.2 84.9 56.4 12.0 52.9 DSKD 58.8 86.4 56.2 9.7 52.8 SimCT 59.6 86.7 56.4 11.4 53.5

SOD under a shared SFT initialization, training data, and optimization budget (Zhong et al., 2026). We evaluate on AIME 2024, AIME 2025 (Mathe-matical Association of America, 2026), and Live-CodeBench v6 (Jain et al., 2025); each score is Average@32 over 32 sampled responses per prob-lem, and Avg. is their unweighted mean. 

Shared implementation. All methods are imple-mented in E ASY OPD and run on the same verl-based infrastructure (Sheng et al., 2024). Within each setting we fix the model, training data, back-end, and evaluation procedure where applicable, re-taining each method’s original supervision design. Optimization, sampling, hardware, and checkpoint details are in Appendix B. 

4.2 Results Cross-tokenizer OPD. Table 2 shows that all four evaluated cross-tokenizer methods improve the unweighted average over the base student. SimCT obtains the highest average (53.5, +3.3 over the base) and the best MATH500, ALM leads on MBPP and LiveCodeBench v6, and DSKD is best on GSM8K. This confirms that the evaluated cross-tokenizer objectives run through EASY OPD’s alignment and loss interfaces un-der a matched setup, while retaining distinct task-dependent profiles. 

On-policy self-distillation. Table 3 compares SDPO and GRPO under the two wall-clock bud-gets. SDPO’s gains are largest on Chemistry and Biology (+19.2 points at one hour, +6.7 and +6.0 at five hours), while GRPO is stronger on GSM8K and on the five-hour Tool Use result. SDPO’s rel-ative performance is thus task-dependent in the evaluated setting. 

Step-wise OPD. Table 4 shows that response-level OPD exceeds GRPO on all three benchmarks, and SOD obtains the highest observed score on 

Table 3: SDPO and GRPO in the OPSD setting un-der one-hour and five-hour wall-clock budgets. Aver-age@16 is the mean correctness over 16 sampled re-sponses per question; Base is the untrained checkpoint, reported once per task. We evaluate every five steps and report the best Average@16 observed within each budget; the best per task and budget is in bold.                                

> avg@16
> Method Chemistry Biology Tool Use GSM8K 1h 5h 1h 5h 1h 5h 1h 5h Base 41.1 30.5 57.7 86.1 GRPO 51.2 72.0 32.1 53.9 62.3 65.8 91.8 93.3
> SDPO 70.4 78.7 51.3 59.9 62.8 62.8 87.7 87.7

Table 4: Step-wise OPD with Qwen3-1.7B as the stu-dent. OPD and SOD use a GRPO-optimized Qwen3-4B teacher. Values are percentages; Avg. is the un-weighted mean across AIME 2024, AIME 2025, and LiveCodeBench v6. Best per column in bold.                     

> Method AIME24 AIME25 LCB-v6 Avg. Base 17.19 12.81 12.41 14.14 GRPO 34.06 26.25 21.93 27.41 OPD 38.13 36.04 30.27 34.81 SOD 43.65 38.33 37.88 39.95

each, for an unweighted average of 39.95 (+5.1 over response-level OPD). These results are consis-tent with the intended role of step-wise weighting, but do not by themselves establish that every step-wise OPD method will outperform response-level OPD. 

Overall findings. Across the three case studies, EASY OPD runs the evaluated methods on the same verl backend while preserving their distinct super-vision requirements; results should be read within each setting rather than as a cross-regime ranking. 

5 Conclusion and Future Work 

We present EasyOPD, a method-oriented frame-work that integrates on-policy distillation meth-ods on a shared verl backend, separating user-side configuration, method-local supervision logic, and distributed execution through thin dispatch hooks. Across cross-tokenizer OPD, on-policy self-distillation, and step-wise OPD, methods with dif-ferent supervision interfaces share this backend while keeping their own objectives and diagnos-tics; future work will broaden method coverage and larger-model evaluation. References 

Microsoft: Abdelrahman Abouelenin, Atabak Ashfaq, Adam Atkinson, Hany Awadalla, Nguyen Bach, Jianmin Bao, Alon Benhaim, Martin Cai, Vishrav Chaudhary, Congcong Chen, Dong Chen, Dong-dong Chen, Jun-Kun Chen, Weizhu Chen, Yen-Chun Chen, Yi-ling Chen, Qi Dai, Xiyang Dai, Ruchao Fan, and 55 others. 2025. Phi-4-mini tech-nical report: Compact yet powerful multimodal lan-guage models via mixture-of-LoRAs. arXiv preprint ,arXiv:2503.01743. Rishabh Agarwal, Nino Vieillard, Yongchao Zhou, Pi-otr Stanczyk, Sabela Ramos Garea, Matthieu Geist, and Olivier Bachem. 2024. On-policy distillation of language models: Learning from self-generated mis-takes. In Proceedings of the 12th International Con-ference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2024) ,Vienna, Austria. Abdolmaged Alkhulaifi, Fahad Alsahli, and Irfan Ah-mad. 2021. Knowledge distillation in deep learn-ing and its applications. PeerJ Computer Science ,7:e474. Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, and Charles Sutton. 2021. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv preprint , arXiv:2108.07732. Nicolas Boizard, Kevin El Haddad, Céline Hudelot, and Pierre Colombo. 2025. Towards cross-tokenizer distillation: The universal logit distillation loss for LLMs. Transactions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR) .Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. 2021. Training verifiers to solve math word prob-lems. arXiv preprint , arXiv:2110.14168. Kehua Feng, Keyan Ding, Weijie Wang, Xiang Zhuang, Zeyuan Wang, Ming Qin, Yu Zhao, Jianhua Yao, Qiang Zhang, and Huajun Chen. 2024. Sci-KnowEval: Evaluating multi-level scientific knowl-edge of large language models. arXiv preprint ,arXiv:2406.09098. Yukang Feng, Jianwen Sun, Zelai Yang, Jiaxin Ai, Chuanhao Li, Zizhen Li, Fanrui Zhang, Kang He, Rui Ma, Jifan Lin, Jie Sun, Yang Xiao, Sizhuo Zhou, Wenxiao Wu, Yiming Liu, Pengfei Liu, Yu Qiao, Shenglin Zhang, and Kaipeng Zhang. 2026. Longcli-bench: A preliminary benchmark and study for long-horizon agentic programming in command-line inter-faces. arXiv preprint , arXiv:2602.14337. Dayuan Fu, Shenyu Wu, Yunze Wu, Zerui Peng, Yax-ing Huang, Jie Sun, Ji Zeng, Mohan Jiang, Lin Zhang, Yukun Li, Jiarui Hu, Liming Liu, Jinlong Hou, and Pengfei Liu. 2026a. davinci-env: Open swe environment synthesis at scale. arXiv preprint ,arXiv:2603.13023. Dayuan Fu, Yunze Wu, Xiaojie Cai, Lyumanshan Ye, Shijie Xia, Zhen Huang, Weiye Si, Tianze Xu, Jie Sun, Keyu Li, Mohan Jiang, Junfei Wang, Qishuo Hua, Pengrui Lu, Xiangkun Hu, Yang Xiao, and Pengfei Liu. 2026b. Argo: Asynchronous rollout with human guidance for research agent optimization. 

OpenReview preprint .Yuxian Gu, Li Dong, Furu Wei, and Minlie Huang. 2024. MiniLLM: Knowledge distillation of large language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .Geoffrey E. Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeffrey Dean. 2015. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. 

arXiv preprint , arXiv:1503.02531. Jonas Hübotter, Frederike Lübeck, Lejs Behric, An-ton Baumann, Marco Bagatella, Daniel Marta, Ido Hakimi, Idan Shenfeld, Thomas Kleine Buening, Car-los Guestrin, and Andreas Krause. 2026. Reinforce-ment learning via self-distillation. arXiv preprint ,arXiv:2601.20802. Naman Jain, King Han, Alex Gu, Wen-Ding Li, Fanjia Yan, Tianjun Zhang, Sida Wang, Armando Solar-Lezama, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. 2025. Live-CodeBench: Holistic and contamination free eval-uation of large language models for code. In Pro-ceedings of the 13th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2025) .Yoon Kim and Alexander M. Rush. 2016. Sequence-level knowledge distillation. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-ral Language Processing , pages 1317–1327, Austin, Texas. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jongwoo Ko, Sungnyun Kim, Tianyi Chen, and Se-Young Yun. 2024. DistiLLM: Towards streamlined distillation for large language models. In Proceed-ings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2024) , volume 235, Vienna, Austria. Gengsheng Li, Mao Zheng, Mingyang Song, Ran Liu, Tianyu Yang, Jie Sun, Qiyong Zhong, Haiyun Guo, and Junfeng Fang. 2026a. On-policy distillation with curriculum turn-level guidance for multi-turn agents. 

arXiv preprint , arXiv:2606.15912. Keyu Li, Junhao Shi, Yang Xiao, Mohan Jiang, Jie Sun, Yunze Wu, Dayuan Fu, Shijie Xia, Xiaojie Cai, Tianze Xu, Weiye Si, Wenjie Li, Dequan Wang, and Pengfei Liu. 2026b. Agencybench: Benchmarking the frontiers of autonomous agents in 1m-token real-world contexts. arXiv preprint , arXiv:2601.11044. Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. 2024. Let’s verify step by step. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Learning Representa-tions (ICLR 2024) .Alexander Lin, Jeremy Wohlwend, Howard Chen, and Tao Lei. 2020. Autoregressive knowledge distillation through imitation learning. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2020) , pages 6121– 6133, Online Event. Kevin Lu and Thinking Machines Lab. 2025. On-policy distillation. Thinking Machines Lab: Connectionism .

https://thinkingmachines.ai/blog/on-polic y-distillation .Mathematical Association of America. 2026. MAA in-vitational competitions: American invitational math-ematics examination (AIME). https://maa.org/ maa-invitational-competitions/ . Accessed: 2026-07-01. Benjamin Minixhofer, Ivan Vuli´ c, and Edoardo Maria Ponti. 2025. Universal cross-tokenizer distillation via approximate likelihood matching. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38 (NeurIPS 2025) .Qwen Team. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint , arXiv:2505.09388. Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. 2024. DeepSeekMath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint ,arXiv:2402.03300. Guangming Sheng, Chi Zhang, Zilingfeng Ye, Xibin Wu, Wang Zhang, Ru Zhang, Yanghua Peng, Haibin Lin, and Chuan Wu. 2024. Hybridflow: A flexible and efficient rlhf framework. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2409.19256 .Mingyang Song and Mao Zheng. 2026. A survey of on-policy distillation for large language models. arXiv preprint , arXiv:2604.00626. Jie Sun, Mao Zheng, Mingyang Song, Qiyong Zhong, Yilin Cheng, Bichuan Feng, Pengfei Liu, Junfeng Fang, and Xiang Wang. 2026. Simct: Recovering lost supervision for cross-tokenizer on-policy distil-lation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.07711. Preprint ,arXiv:2605.07711. Qiaoyu Tang, Ziliang Deng, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, Qiao Liang, Boxi Cao, and Le Sun. 2023. ToolAlpaca: Generalized tool learning for language models with 3000 simulated cases. arXiv preprint ,arXiv:2306.05301. Leandro von Werra, Younes Belkada, Lewis Tunstall, Edward Beeching, Tristan Thrush, Nathan Lambert, Shengyi Huang, Kashif Rasul, and Quentin Gal-louédec. 2020. TRL: Transformers reinforcement learning. https://github.com/huggingface/t rl . GitHub repository. Yunze Wu, Dayuan Fu, Weiye Si, Zhen Huang, Mo-han Jiang, Keyu Li, Shijie Xia, Jie Sun, Tianze Xu, Xiangkun Hu, Pengrui Lu, Xiaojie Cai, Lyuman-shan Ye, Wenhong Zhu, Yang Xiao, and Pengfei Liu. 2025. Innovatorbench: Evaluating agents’ ability to conduct innovative LLM research. arXiv preprint ,arXiv:2510.27598. Yang Xiao, Mohan Jiang, Jie Sun, Keyu Li, Jifan Lin, Yumin Zhuang, Ji Zeng, Shijie Xia, Qishuo Hua, Xuefeng Li, Xiaojie Cai, Tongyu Wang, Yue Zhang, Liming Liu, Xia Wu, Jinlong Hou, Yuan Cheng, Wen-jie Li, Xiang Wang, and 2 others. 2025. Limi: Less is more for agency. arXiv preprint , arXiv:2509.17567. An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jian-hong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, and 22 others. 2024a. Qwen2.5 technical report. arXiv preprint ,arXiv:2412.15115. Chuanpeng Yang, Wang Lu, Yao Zhu, Yidong Wang, Qian Chena, Chenlong Gao, Bingjie Yan, and Yiqiang Chen. 2024b. Survey on knowledge distilla-tion for large language models: Methods, evaluation, and application. arXiv preprint , arXiv:2407.01885. Ji Zeng, Dayuan Fu, Tiantian Mi, Yumin Zhuang, Yax-ing Huang, Xuefeng Li, Lyumanshan Ye, Muhang Xie, Qishuo Hua, Zhen Huang, Mohan Jiang, Han-ning Wang, Jifan Lin, Yang Xiao, Jie Sun, Yunze Wu, and Pengfei Liu. 2026. davinci-dev: Agent-native mid-training for software engineering. arXiv preprint , arXiv:2601.18418. Songming Zhang, Xue Zhang, Zengkui Sun, Yufeng Chen, and Jinan Xu. 2024. Dual-space knowledge distillation for large language models. In Proceed-ings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2024) , pages 18164–18181, Miami, Florida, USA. Songming Zhang, Xue Zhang, Tong Zhang, Bojie Hu, Yufeng Chen, and Jinan Xu. 2026. KDFlow: A user-friendly and efficient knowledge distillation frame-work for large language models. arXiv preprint ,arXiv:2603.01875. Qiyong Zhong, Mao Zheng, Mingyang Song, Xin Lin, Jie Sun, Houcheng Jiang, Xiang Wang, and Junfeng Fang. 2026. Sod: Step-wise on-policy distillation for small language model agents. arXiv preprint ,arXiv:2605.07725. Zilin Zhu, Chengxing Xie, Xin Lv, and slime Contrib-utors. 2025. slime: An llm post-training framework for rl scaling. https://github.com/THUDM/slime .GitHub repository. Corresponding author: Xin Lv. A Framework Comparison Details 

Table 5 provides the framework-specific evidence underlying the ratings in Table 1. 

B Experimental Setup Details 

We summarize the optimization, sampling, and hardware settings for the three case studies. Un-less noted otherwise, all settings are taken from the released configuration files and launch scripts. 

Software environment. All experiments run on a node with 8× NVIDIA H20 96GB GPUs (driver 535.161.08, CUDA 12.4) under Ubuntu 22.04, us-ing the released OpenAgentRL conda environment (Python 3.11, PyTorch 2.6.0+cu124, verl 0.5.0, Ray 2.47.1, Transformers 4.51.1, vLLM 0.8.5.post1, SGLang 0.4.6.post1, FlashAttention 2.7.4.post1, and xFormers 0.0.29.post2). The full pinned de-pendency list and a one-click installer are released with the code. 

Cross-tokenizer OPD. We distill Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct (vocabulary size 151,936) into a Phi-4-mini-Instruct student (3.8B, vocabulary size 200,064) that is first SFT-warm-started on ashared 10K mixed math-and-code corpus derived from the single-turn prompt–answer pairs of the 

mixed_math_code_10k dataset. Training uses GRPO with a cross-tokenizer KL reward, a learn-ing rate of 5 × 10 −7 with a 0.05 warmup ratio, a train batch size of 64 , one epoch ( 154 steps over the ∼9.9K training prompts), maximum prompt and response lengths of 4096 tokens, and single-sample rollouts at temperature 0.6. All compared methods share this training-prompt set and opti-mization budget. We save a checkpoint every 20 

steps and, after merging, evaluate each checkpoint with an SGLang-based inference server, reporting exact-match accuracy for reasoning (verified with 

math_verify ) and pass@1 for code on MATH500, GSM8K, MBPP, and LiveCodeBench v6. 

On-policy self-distillation. SDPO uses Qwen3-8B as both the student and the self-teacher, with an EMA self-teacher (update rate 0.05 ), top-k logit distillation with k = 100 , and a symmetric KL interpolation ( α = 0 .5). Following the SDPO setup (Hübotter et al., 2026), we evaluate a check-point every five training steps and report the best Average@16 observed within the one-hour and five-hour wall-clock budgets, where Average@16 is the mean correctness over 16 independently sampled responses per question. 

Step-wise OPD. We use Qwen3-1.7B as the stu-dent and a GRPO-optimized Qwen3-4B as the teacher, with a shared SFT initialization, training data, and optimization budget across compared methods. Rollouts are multi-turn tool-interaction trajectories, and SOD applies step-wise adaptive weighting (with numerical-stability offset ϵ =10 −6 and bound offset δ = 0 .2) on top of the response-level OPD objective. Each benchmark score is Average@32 over 32 independently sam-pled responses per problem. 

C Released Methods and Hooks 

Table 6 lists the released methods used in this work and the dispatch hooks each one registers. Ev-ery method generates on-policy rollouts through verl’s shared rollout engine; the hooks in the table are the additional method-local extension points a method registers on top of this shared pipeline. Because a hook only routes data or control to a method module, a method activates only the hooks it needs: a logit-based objective such as GKD reg-isters a single loss hook, whereas methods that require teacher-side computation or per-step trajec-tory metadata additionally register a teacher-sidecar or rollout-metadata hook. All other pipeline stages, including rollout generation, worker orchestration, and optimization, are reused from verl unchanged. OPD supervision-interface coverage Framework properties Framework OPD Cross-tok. OPD On-policy self-distill. Step-wise OPD Released YAML/CLI Documented method extension API Compatible w/ multi-node TRL ✓ ◦a ◦b × ✓ ×c ◦d

verl ✓ × × ◦e ✓ ×f ✓

slime ✓g × ◦h ◦e,g ✓ ×f ✓

KDFlow ✓ ✓ ✓i × ✓ ◦j ◦k

Ours ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

Table 5: Framework-specific evidence supporting the ratings in Table 1. Ratings reflect publicly documented functionality of the following versions: EasyOPD builds on verl 0.5.0, and we compare against TRL 0.27.0, the slime repository (accessed 2025-06-19), and the KDFlow implementation (Zhang et al., 2026). Where a capability could not be verified from public documentation or code, it is marked as not documented rather than inferred as absent.  

> a

Cross-tokenizer support is provided through experimental distillation components rather than the standard GKD path.  

> b

TRL provides an experimental SDPO trainer with live, base, and EMA teacher options, but the support is tied to a specialized trainer.  

> c

OPD variants are implemented as separate trainer classes rather than composable method-level extension points.  

> d

Multi-node trainer execution is available, but a disaggregated asynchronous rollout–teacher–trainer pipeline is not provided.  

> e

Agentic or step-wise supervision is expressible through general reward/RLVR and multi-turn infrastructure, but is not exposed as a dedicated OPD interface.  

> f

New variants require method-specific logic across internal rollout, reward/advantage, logit-processing, or loss components.  

> g

slime provides OPD through its RL reward/advantage pipeline and offers strong agentic and multi-turn rollout infrastructure.  

> h

A released slime example uses the original model as the teacher for self-distillation, but does not expose a general live or EMA self-teacher interface.  

> i

KDFlow supports student-to-teacher weight synchronization and EMA teacher updates for on-policy self-distillation.  

> j

KDFlow provides decoupled algorithm APIs, but they remain tied to its own distillation stack.  

> k

KDFlow supports distributed execution, while its documented on-policy training loop is primarily synchronous. 

Table 6: Method-local dispatch hooks registered by each released method, beyond the shared rollout– optimization pipeline that all methods reuse from verl. 

✓ marks an activated hook; the rollout-metadata hook attaches per-step or trajectory annotations and is distinct from rollout generation itself. Cross-tokenizer align-ment in SimCT reuses the shared simple teacher side-car and is applied inside its loss path. 

Method Loss Rollout meta. Teacher sidecar Setting GKD ✓ × × Logit SimCT ✓ × ✓ Cross-tok. SDPO ✓ × ✓ Self-distill. SOD ✓ ✓ × Step-wise